OpenTracing migration overview (#1083)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/migration/ot_overview.md

> ---

Reviewer: Could we just name the file `opentracing.md`?

Author: no problemo

> title: Migrating from OpenTelemetry 

Reviewer: ... from OpenTracing

Author: Derp

weight: 20

> ---

Reviewer: Could you also mark this page as draft for now. That will allow us to merge it without having it published to the website yet. I'll like to make a pass for copyedits. 

If you agree, then add `draft: true` to the front matter.

The OpenTelemetry project aims to provide backwards compatibility with the
[OpenTracing](https://opentracing.io) project, in order to ease migration to OpenTelemetry. 
The intention is to allow OpenTracing instrumentation to be
recorded using the OpenTelemetry SDK, and to allow both the OpenTelemetry 
and the OpenTracing APIs to be used together in the same codebase.

> To accomplish this, each OpenTelemetry SDK provides and **OpenTracing Shim**, which can be installed

Author: Geh, the current spec calls it a shim, so I am using that: 
https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/compatibility/opentracing.md

We are probably being sloppy though, and using both terms.

in order to connect the SDK to the OpenTracing API. Please note that the OpenTracing Shim is not
enabled by default.

## Language version Support

For reference see the following table, listing the OpenTracing
and OpenTelemetry APIs minimum **language** version, as of
January 2022:

| Language   | OpenTracing API  | OpenTelemetry API |
| ---------- | ---------------- | ----------------- |
| Go         | 1.13             | 1.16              |
| Java       | 7                | 8                 |
| Python     | 2.7              | 3.6               |
| Javascript | 6                | 8.5               |
| DotNet     | 1.3              | 1.4               |

> | CPP        | 11               | 11                |

Reviewer: Will this table might age quickly? If so, are you comfortable with that (since this isn't a blog page, but a main docs page).

Author: Yes, I expect this data to change rarely, if at all. Dating it is still helpful though.

## Migration Overview

Currently, there are many codebases which are instrumented with OpenTracing. These
codebases may use the OpenTracing API to instrument their apllication code, and they may
install OpenTracing plugins to instrument the libraries and frameworks.

For a simple approach to migrating to OpenTelemetry, you can do the following.

1. Install the OpenTelemetry SDK, and remove the current OpenTracing implementation (e.g. the Jaeger client).
2. Install the OpenTelemetry instrumentation libraries, and remove the OpenTracing equivalents.
3. Update your dashboards, alerts, etc, to consume the new OpenTelemetry data.
4. When writing new application code, write all new instrumentation using the OpenTelemetry API.
5. Reinstrument your existing application code using the OpenTelemetry API when it is convenient.
There is no hard requirement to remove existing OpenTracing API calls from your application, they will continue to work.

The above approach works. However, replacing all existing OpenTracing instrumentation libraries at once could be burdensome. 
To avoid any break in observability, we recommend that OpenTracing users progressively migrate their applications.

> The following migration guide presents a careful, incremental approach to transitioning to OpenTelemetry.

Reviewer: IMHO, the entire page is a "migration guide". How about replacing the sentence

> The following migration guide presents a careful

with

> The steps below offer an incremental approach to transitioning to OpenTelemetry.

whether there is any kind of break in instrumentation.

1. Replace the OpenTracing Trace implementation you are currently using with the OpenTelemetry
SDK. For example, if you are using the Jaeger, remove the Jaeger client and install the equivalent
OpenTelemetry client.
2. Install the OpenTracing Shim. This shim allows the OpenTelemetry SDK to consume OpenTracing instrumentation.
3. Configure the OpenTelemetry SDK to export data using the same protocol and format that 
the OpenTracing client was using. For example, if you were using an OpenTracing client that exported 
tracing data in Zipkin format, configure the OpenTelemetry client to do the same.
4. Alternatively, configure the OpenTelemetry SDK to emit OTLP, and send the data to a Collector, where 
you can manage exporting data in multiple formats.

Once you have the OpenTelemetry SDK installed, confirm that you can deploy your application and still
recieve the same OpenTracing-based telemetry. In other words, corfirm that your dashboards, alerts, and other
tracing-based analysis tools are still working.

### Step 2: progressively replace instrumentation

> Once the OpenTelemetry SDK is installed, all new instrumentation can now be written using the OpenTelemetry API. With few

Reviewer: Nit: if you could line-wrap the paragraphs in this section too, that would be great.

Author: Done, line wrapped everything at 80

For existing instrumentation, it is recomended that 
1. Replace one piece of OpenTracing instrumentation with its OpenTelemetry equivalent.
2. Observe how this changes the telemetry which your application produces.
3. Create new dashboards, alerts, etc which consume this new telemetry. Set up these dashboards before
deploying the new OpenTelemetry library to production.
4. Optionally, add proccessing rules to the Collector which convert the new telemetry back into the old telemetry.
The Collector can then be configured to emit both versions of the same telemetry, creating a data overlap. This allows
new dashboards to populate themselves while you continue to use the old dashboards.

## Limits on compatibility

When migrating to OpenTelemetry, there are several notable edge cases to be aware of.

### Semantic Conventions are not the same

> As mentioned above in the migration guide, OpenTelemetry has an improved model for instrumenting software. This means that the "tags" which are set

Reviewer: > As mentioned above in the migration guide, OpenTelemetry

-->

> As mentioned above, OpenTelemetry

> by OpenTracing instrumentation may be different than the "attributes" which are set by OpenTelemetry. In other words, when replacing existing instrumentation, the data OpenTelemetry produces may be different from the data OpenTracing produces. When switching instrumentaiton, be sure to also update any dashboards, alerts, etc. which relied on the old data.

Reviewer: The end part of this paragraph seems redundant relative to what was shared earlier.

Author: Ok. I would like to hammer this point home, but I'll try to word it in a way that acknowledges that it has been said repeatedly.

Author: please check out the new wording

### Baggage
In OpenTraacing, baggage is carred with a SpanContext object associated with a Span. In OpenTelemetry, context and propagation are lower-level concepts – spans, baggage, metrics instruments, and other items are carried within a context object.

> 
> As a result of this change, baggage which is set using the OpenTracing API is not available to OpenTelemetry Propagators. As a result, mixing the OpenTelemetry and OpenTracing APIs is not recommended when using baggage. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a result, baggage that is set using the OpenTracing API is not available in the lower-level of OpenTelemetry context. Therefore, mixing the OpenTelemetry and OpenTracing APIs is not recommended when using baggage. 
```

> Specifically:
> * Baggage which is set using the OpenTracing API is not available via the OpenTelemetry API.
> * Baggage whith is set using the OpenTracing API is not injected by OpenTelemetry propagators.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Specifically, baggage which is set using the OpenTracing API:
* is not accessible via the OpenTelemetry API
* is not injected by the OpenTelemetry propagators.
```
